Formatting
----------

Each line must contain fewer than 80 characters.

Use four spaces for each indentation level; tabs are forbidden.

Code must never exceed five levels of indentation at any point.

A statement or command must not begin deeper than four indentation levels.

Continuation lines, such as wrapped expressions, function arguments, or comprehensions,
must only use one further level of indentation relative to the beginning of the command.

When taking continuation lines into account,
it follows that the code must never exceed five levels of indentation at any point.

Deferring to helper functions, helper methods, and similar constructs is a good way to maintain indentation limits.

Typing
------

The entire codebase must be strictly typed.

All functions, methods, variables, and attributes must have explicit type annotations,
except where ``mypy`` does not tolerate it.

Even ``self`` (in methods) and ``cls`` (in classmethods) must be explicitly annotated as ``Self`` and ``type[Self]``.

All local variables within a function or method must be declared with type annotations at the beginning of the scope, without assignment.
Assignment must occur separately at the point of first use.

Prefer importing types from ``collections.abc`` over importing from ``typing``.

Docstrings
----------

Everything that can have a docstring should have a docstring.

Prefer one line docstrings over multi-line docstrings.

Every docstring should be in the imperative mood.

Where possible docstrings can be set with `setdoc <https://pypi.org/project/setdoc/>`_.

Ordering
--------

The order of the members of a module should be as follows:

- docstring
- ``__future__`` imports (if existing)
- all module level dunder members (at minimum ``__all__``)
- all top level standard library imports (if any present)
- all top level third party imports (if any present)
- all top level internal imports (if any present)
- all (non-dunder) module level variables/constants (if any present)
- all module level classes (if any present)
- all module level functions (if any present)
- the call to one function under a ``if __name__ == "__main__":`` guard (if present)

All the module level functions might also be put before all the module level classes if that avoids technical challenges.

The individual imports within each of the top level import blocks (standard library imports, third party imports, and internal imports) should be sorted in accordance with ``isort``.
The ``isort`` order also applies to potential blocks of imports at any other location in the code.

Whenever the other rules of this style guide, established convention, and technical convenience all allow for more than one possible ordering of something,
the more alphabetical ordering is prefered.

This preference applies to ...

- the items of ``__all__``,
- module members,
- callables inside of classes,
- keyword parameters of functions,
- type annotations at the beginning of functions,
- data within datafiles,
- all other files inside of a python project, including the manifest,
- and everything else.

Documentation
-------------

``__all__`` must explicitly list every symbol intended to be part of the module's public interface.
``__all__`` may be empty but must always exist.
Everything in ``__all__`` must be in the documentation.
Everything in the documentation must be in ``__all__``.
If the ``__all__`` of multiple python files reference the same feauture,
i.e. the feauture can be imported from more than one module,
then the documentation might mention it still only once.

Tests should limit themselves to these public features.

Interfaces
----------

The CLI entry, if existing, should be called ``main``. It should at least support ``main(args: Optional[Iterable[str]] = None, /) -> None``.

The parser  ...

- should provide at least ``-h``, ``--help``, and ``--version``,
- should permit unique abbreviations of long options,
- should permit clustering short options,
- should not use long options with just one dash (e.g. ``-foo``),
- should not use any options with an arity greater than ``1``,
- but can use repeatable options.

If there is ``main``, then there should always be an equivalent API entry ``run``.

The signature of run should imitate the parser of ``main`` within reason.
Everything that can be done with ``main`` (except printing the help or the version)
should also be possible with calling ``run``, and vice-versa.

For example: If ``main("--verbose --bar=hello --foo=monty --bar=world spam 42".split())`` conforms to the parser within ``main``,
then ``run("spam", 42, bar=["hello", "world"], foo="monty", verbose=True)`` could be the equivalent.

Temporary files
---------------

Temporary files should not be created as such.
Instead, create a temporary directory and create temporary files directly or nestedly therein.

Abbreviations
-------------

All abbreviations (e.g. variable names, import aliases, etc.) should ...

- start with the same letter as the full term
- have at maximum half the length of the full term

Bending the rules
-----------------

The rules of this style guide may be broken only when no alternative exists.

In such cases, a comment must reference the violated rule in paraphrased form, for example:

.. code-block:: python

    # The style guide advises against exceeding five indentation levels.
    # In this case, however, compliance is impossible because
    # [here explanation]

The explanation should contain approximately 25 words describing why the violation was necessary.

Bug Reports
-----------

Flag something as an a defect only if the context or the documentation itself provides clear evidence that it is one.
Do not infer defects from speculative alternative intentions, purposes, scopes, or features.
Always state at least briefly which style rule or design target was violated.
The proposed solutions should always be to change as little as possible, as much as necessary.
